# Chapter 9 - Rising to the Occasion

## Batter ***Clutchness***

An objection may be raised to the new statistics that while they are more accurate and logical than traditional stats, they still don't reveal what fans really want to know: the value of an accomplishment in a given time and place, its ***clutchness***. Just as not all bases are created equal(a walk is not as good as a hit, nor is a home run worth as much as four singles) so is it true that not all similar situations are of equal importance. A double with men on base, for example, is more valuable than a double with the bases empty. It is also worth more with two outs and runners on than with no one on and no one out(and perhaps more still, depending upon the score, the inning, the team's position in the standings, the point in the season, etc).

Most fans believe that when a player contributes something to his team is more important than, or at least equally important as, what he contributes. They defend their favorite ballplayer, in spite of ample statistical evidence that the man is a dud, with claims that he doesn't really bear down until the pressure is on(at which point he becomes a world beater). Thus one can argue that the player's puny OPS of.550 is not the true measure of the man: that he can only be appreciated by those who see him day in, day out, and who know his basehits to be particularly meaningful(he gets most of them in the late innings, or against first division clubs, or he has a knack for starting rallies and hence inspiring the men who follow him in the batting order). This is rank subjectivism, of course, which statisticians have tried to combat almost since the beginning of major league play.

The first attempt to measure hitters' clutch ability came in 1879 with the introduction of the run batted in(RBI). Yet, RBI opportunities are not distributed randomly throughout the lineup, for which reason any ranking by this statistic would discriminate. The other fundamental weakness of the RBI even more damaging is that men on different teams do not have the same RBI opportunities; you can't drive in runners who aren't on base. If you're playing for a team that doesn't put many men on base or you're left unprotected in the batting order(in other words, you are a good hitter followed by a comparative pushover) few fat pitches will be coming your way with men on base.

It is not unusual for a man who has been traded to see his RBIs increase or decrease by 20-30 percent while his other batting stats remain roughly the same. Has the batter whose RBIs decline left his clutch ability behind with his former club? The answer, certainly, is no. The RBI total is not a measure of intestinal fortitude any more than is the runs scored total: It is a measure of fortuity, not of clutch ability. An RBI total will tell you (a) how many runs a batter drove in, but not (b) how many baserunners he stranded, or what his ***RBI Ratio*** was. An RBI Ratio may take into account the quality of the batters ahead of the player being evaluated, but it reveals nothing about the quality of the man batting behind him. In Branch Rickey’s words: ***RBI’s are not only misleading, but dishonest***.

Another measure of clutch ability is the game winning RBI, defined as the run which gives a team a lead it never relinquishes: For example, if the score is tied at 1-1 in the second inning, you are hit by a pitch with the bases loaded, and your team winds up holding the lead and winning 11-7, you are awarded the GWRBI. Is this a measure of clutch performance?

If a situation is clutch, a batter should sense its importance. The outcome of the game should hang in the balance, which it cannot very well do in the second inning. The GWRBI defines the clutch situation retroactively, which is unsatisfactory, an instance of hindsight being 20-20. Also, the GWRBI takes a situation-dependent stat, the RBI, and makes it contingent upon still further variables which are not randomly distributed. A batter for a team which wins a few games will find it tougher to gain a GWRBI, just as a player with few RBIs, because of his spot in the order, will have commensurately few GWRBIs.

For proof that the GWRBI is measuring clutch ability, advocates cite the caliber of player found at the top of the charts each year; the list of leaders, however, is nothing more than a list of good hitters under any circumstances, who happen to bat in the middle of the order for a plus .500 team.

The GWRBI implies that a victory is equally attainable at any point in the game. The ***when*** doesn't count, only the ***what***. Yet, if clutch hitting exists at all, being able to hit in a timely fashion is its very essence.

If a player has clutch ability, it would be likely to manifest itself over time. If clutch hitters really exist, one would certainly expect that a batter who was a clutch hitter in 1969 would also tend to be a clutch hitter in 1970. But if no such tendency exists, then ***clutch hitting*** must surely be a matter of luck. After all, the only means of ever identifying a clutch hitter would be by his consistency, if not from situation to situation at least from season to season.

Does clutch hitting exist? The question is reminiscent of the dispute over the curveball that has simmered from the 1870s to the present day: Is it real, or is it illusion? With the curveball, the current answer is ***both***-the ball does break, but not ***late*** as supposed. With clutch hitting, the answer appears to be ***both*** as well-that a batter can be ***hot*** in key situations for a period, brief or extended, but not over a Span many seasons. Those batters who are the most productive over the long haul are likely to be the best in the clutch as well, because the laws of chance have more opportunity to exert themselves over a greater number of hits.

What does it really mean when someone is called a ***clutch hitter***? Is he really a batter who doesn’t fold under pressure or is he a lazy batter who bothers to try his hardest only when the game is on the line?

## Pitcher ***Clutchness***

How would you measure clutch pitching performance? One might keep track of situations in which the pitcher leaves men in scoring position. Or, taking a cue from Branch Rickey's formula, one might divide the pitcher's runs allowed by his baserunners allowed. The problem(actually, only one of several problems) with this approach is that it rewards a pitcher for putting himself in hot water. Really, all that matters for pitchers is runs, earned or not unless you believe that a man can pitch ***just well enough to win***,that is, allow 4 or 5 runs only when his team scores 6 or 7; then you might regard a pitcher's won-lost percentage over that of his team, minus his own efforts, as a clutch measure.
