# Chapter 10 - 44 Percent of Baseball

Pitching is 70 percent of baseball, said Connie Mack. Pitching is 50 percent of baseball, said Branch Rickey. Pitching is 35 percent of baseball, said George Weiss. More recent/guesstimates, for that is what they are, supported by impressions rather than evidence have ranged from a high of 80 percent, by Herman Franks to a low of 15 percent, by Joe McDonald when he was G. M. Of the Mets.

Everybody has an answer, but nobody, it seems, understands the question. How else to explain the extraordinarily divergent responses of those best in a position to know? To the question, "What part of baseball is pitching?", take an answer of, say, 70 percent. Does this mean that if your club's pitching is "better" than the other club's on a given day, or than the other clubs' in a given season, your chances of winning the game or pennant are 70 percent? Does it mean that however good your club's pitching is, the combined efforts of the batters, fielders, and baserunners(let's forget about intangibles like attitude) have only a 30 percent impact on the outcome? Does it mean that the essence of the game is the battle between pitcher and batter, and the pitcher will have his way 70 percent of the time? Or does it mean that O pitching effectiveness has a 70 percent correlation with winning percentage? These do not exhaust the possible interpretations.

There is no getting around the fact that baseball is divided equally between offense and defense: Each run scored by Team A is a run allowed by Team B. With the game split down the middle at 50-50, the question becomes how much of the offense to attribute to batting and how much to baserunning, and how much of the defense is accounted for pitching and how much by fielding.

In 1910, when roughly 70 percent of all runs were earned, George Weiss's opinion that pitching was 35 percent of baseball would have been correct, by our lights, inasmuch as earned runs can be considered the responsibility of the pitchers and unearned runs the responsibility of the fielders(70 percent of the defense's 50 percent of the game equals 35 percent). As errors became less frequent-which is another way of saying, as the average level of fielding skill improved-pitchers took on a greater share of sibility for all runs scored. In recent years, with only 12 percent of all runs being unearned, fielding thus accounts for 6 percent of the game and pitching 44 percent. If unearned runs continue to decline as a percentage of total runs, pitching will one day become as large a part of the game as batting; it is not as large now. However, it is undeniably important, and there are several unconventional, appealing ways to gauge its effectiveness.

The objective of the game is to win, and that objective is impeded only by runs allowed; the imperative for the pitcher is not to throw a no-hitter but to throw a shutout.

## Opponents Batting Average, StrikeOuts and Balls

The hits-to-innings-pitched ratio is commonly known as the Opponents Batting Average. Recording opponents' BA or OBA may be an interesting exercise, but it is no more meaningful than measuring a pitcher's ratio of strikes to balls. In fact the two events, while related, are not directly comparable, in that the strikeout has run value only when an out in the field may advance or score a baserunner, while a walk almost always increases the opponent's run potential.  The strikeout is romantic, glamorous, a pitcher's opportunity to do something all by Himself, unaided by his fielders. As a glamor stat it resembles the home run, a similarly individual feat, similarly overrated. The analo extends to the paranoid delusion of grandeur which sometimes seizes both the strikeout artist and the long-ball champ, that each has to ***do all by himself***, save runs, that is, or create them.

## The Pitching Crown: Won-Lost Pct, ERA and Strikeouts

A few years ago, Leonard Koppett proposed a triple crown for pitchers much like the triple crown for batters. The three jewels in the pitching crown would be Won-Lost percentage, Earned Run Average, and strikeouts. A pitcher who wins such a crown has indeed had himself an outstanding year, but the three jewels are not equally precious: The ERA title is worth more than the won-lost title, which in turn is worth more than the strikeout leadership. It's possible to lead the league in strikeouts in an otherwise poor year. On top of that, both Won-Lost Pct. and ERA are heavily influenced by the quality of the team one pitches for.

## The Relief Pitcher

Absent from the chapter to this point has been the relief pitcher, who presents a variety of statistical problems. The nature of the job is such that his won-lost record is not meaningful. A reliever may pick up a win with as little as a third of an inning's work, if he is lucky, while a starter must go five innings; a reliever may also pick up a loss more easily, for if he allows a run there may be little or no opportunity for his teammates to get it back, as they can for a starter. Earned Run Average is meaningful for the reliever. A reliever frequently begins his work with a man or two already out, and thus can put men on base and strand them without having to register three outs.

When you think of a relief pitcher in the modern-day sense, you think about a man who can appear in 50 or more ball games a year, all or nearly, in relief, and win/save 30 or more. However, in the past, a reliever couldn’t work enough innings to qualify for an ERA title nor could he expect to win 20 games. Conscious of this, Jerry Holtzman of the Chicago Sun-Times introduced the save, a specialized statistic fór the relief pitcher that accounted for his specialized employment.
