# Chapter 7 - The Good Old Days are Now

Much of the charm of baseball is its archaic quality, its tableau vivant of a simpler time gone by. Baseball has become the fixed point world; things may fall apart, but the center holds. Baseball remains a world unto itself with its small, slow changes arising only from its own mandate.

Baseball in 1896, saw four men hit over .390, a level of performance seemingly unattainable today. In truth, such a level can be attained whenever management deems it desirable. The rule in baseball as in the garment trade is change or die, for without periodic tinkering with the rules, the ball, the playing conditions, etc., it is certain that one force in baseball(the offense or the defense) will rule the game to such an extent that spectators will lose interest. Or at least that's the way the owners have always felt and acted.

Baseball is not a purely athletic event like a track meet, where the attraction is men and women performing to their maximums, but rather an entertainment, an exhibition tailored to the presumed preferences of the paying public, like horse racing. Just as horses are assigned different weights to produce a close race, so are pitchers or batters, in their turns, hampered or abetted so as to keep the game competitive and uniform with that of seasons past.

Although the contestants of today are very different in their abilities, physiologies, attitudes, and training, the game looks the same as that of 1893 or 1953, the scores are about the same, and the individual performances are about the same. Was the average player better some ninety years ago? Have the numbers changed with the game, or has the game changed to keep the numbers more or less constant?

Where are the stars of yesteryear? Where today is a man like Hoss Radbourn, who pitched 27 consecutive Providence games and won 26 of them? Where is a Rogers Hornsby, who averaged over.400 for a five-year period? A Babe Ruth, who in 1920 hit more homers than fourteen of the fifteen other big-league teams? A Jack Taylor, who over five years completed 187 consecutive starts? Why were so many all-time pitching records set between 1900 and 1919 and so many batting records over the next two decades? Giants assuredly walked the earth in those days, as demonstrated in the previous chapter's tables of relative averages; but men of the same stature, or greater, are among us today, their abilities camouflaged by the comparative expertise of those around them.

We believe baseball today is better than it's ever been, and that baseball players are, too. We believe that the Golden Age is a period identified flexibly with one's youth.

Isn't it odd that baseball owners and officials would like us to believe that the game has never been better than it is today, in order to nut more fannies in the seats, yet their Rules Committee leaps into action whenever the game seems to be on the verge of change, whenever the traditional balance between offense and defense appears in danger of tilting lastingly one way or the other. Baseball's owners are in the entertainment business, where the customer is always right, and the successful impresario anticipates what the public wants. If pitching seems to be dominating the game, they make a seemingly minor adjustment like lowering the mound five inches and-poof-there is an explosion of hitting. If the batters are making major-league baseball look like Sunday picnic beerball, they make another minor adjustment, like decreasing the tension with which the wool in the ball is wound, and the former balance is restored. Baseball is a delicate mechanism, and seemingly minuscule adjustments in its rules can have mammoth results.

Another force affecting the game has been fashion, that mass delusion which acts on baseball in the same way it does on hemlines and hair styles. An edict or aphorism delivered by a respected source like Henry Chadwick or John McGraw or Earl Weaver may Soue the way the game is played for years. A World Series champion snap style of play perceived as unusual or "revolutionary" will spawn imitators throughout baseball, from the majors to the sandlots. When the Dodgers were winning championships with pitching, speed, and defense in the early 1960s, they set a trend for others to follow. A particular team's style of play cannot be appropriated by iust anybody who admires it: It must be suited to a team's home park.

With individual, team, and league performance all captive to the rules tinkerers and the dictates of fashion gurus, as well as broad trends in society which have impact on the talent pool available to the major league clubs, it is quite a task to separate out and quantify the variables that combine to keep the statistics within so narrow a range.

One who claims that baseball is better than ever, as we do, should have no expectation of being believed without evidence. Relative measures are a first step, permitting us to place individual performance in the context of league performance, but with the game in a constant state of minute agitation(a continuing series of corrections designed to maintain an implicit order or balance) how can we evaluate the context itself? Has baseball been improving as it has changed, or has change been enforced to mask a deterioration of play?

Some amazing statistics( i.e Ty Cobb batting for a lifetime of .367, Ed Walsh winning 40 in a single season, the New York Giants stealing a total of 367 bases in one season, far more .400 individual batting marks than any other period of time ) were achieved only because the rank and file players were far inferior to those of today, thus enabling the stars to stick out like a sore thumb.

Ranking Players across different ERA’s

No two experts, even the most knowledgeable, would rank plavers in exactly the same way, because they played in different eras against different opposition, in different ballparks and cities with winning or losing teams, and all these facts bear on the choices.
